# awsborn

This Gem lets you define and launch a server cluster on Amazon EC2.
The `launch` operation is idempotent, i.e., it only launches instances
that are not running.

## Installation

    gem install awsborn

## Synopsis

    #! /usr/bin/env ruby

    require 'rubygems'
    require 'awsborn'

    # If not set, will be picked up from ENV['AMAZON_ACCESS_KEY_ID']
    Awsborn.access_key_id = 'AAAAAAAAAAAA'
    # Can be picked up from ENV['AMAZON_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY'] or Keychain (OS X)
    Awsborn.secret_access_key = 'KKKKKKKKKKKK'

    # Logs to `awsborn.log` in current dir with level INFO by default.
    # To suppress logging, do `Awsborn.logger = Logger.new('/dev/null')`
    Awsborn.logger.level = Logger::DEBUG

    class LogServer < Awsborn::Server
      instance_type    :m1_small
      image_id         'ami-2fc2e95b', :sudo_user => 'ubuntu'
      security_group   'Basic web'
      keys             'keys/*.pub'
      bootstrap_script 'chef-bootstrap.sh'
      monitor          true
    end

    log_servers = LogServer.cluster do
      domain 'releware.net'
      server :log_a, :zone => :eu_west_1a, :disk => {:sdf => "vol-a857b8c1"}, :ip => 'log-a'
      server :log_b, :zone => :eu_west_1b, :disk => {:sdf => "vol-aa57b8c3"}, :ip => 'log-b'
    end

    log_servers.launch

    log_servers.each do |server|
      system "rake cook server=#{server.host_name}"
    end

## How it works

It's really simple:

1. Define a server type (`LogServer` in the example above).
2. Define a cluster of server instances.
3. Launch the cluster.

See *Launching a cluster* below for details.

### Defining a server type

Server types can be named anything but must inherit from `Awsborn::Server`.
Servers take five different directives:

* `instance_type` -- a symbol.  One of `:m1_small`, `:m1_large`, `:m1_xlarge`,
  `:m2_2xlarge`, `:m2_4xlarge`, `:c1_medium`, and `:c1_xlarge`.
* `image_id` -- a valid EC2 AMI.  Specify `:sudo_user` as an option if the AMI
  does not allow you to log in as root.
* `security_group` -- a security group that you own.
* `keys` -- one or more globs to public ssh keys.  When the servers are running,
  `root` will be able to log in using any one of these keys.
* `bootstrap_script` -- path to a script which will be run on each instance as
  soon as it is started.  Use it to bootstrap `chef` and let `chef` take it from
  there.  A sample bootstrap script is included towards the end of this document.

A server cannot be started without `instance_type`, `image_id` and `security_group`.
The don't have to be defined for the server type though, but can
equally well be added as options to the specific servers.

### Defining a cluster

The `cluster` method accepts two commands, `domain` and `server`.  `domain` is
optional and is just a way to avoid repetition in the `server` commands.  `server`
takes a name (which can be used as a key in the cluster, e.g. `log_servers[:log_a]`)
and a hash:

Mandatory keys:

* `:zone` -- the availability zone for the server.  One of `:us_east_1a`, `:us_east_1b`,
  `:us_east_1c`, `:us_west_1a`, `:us_west_1b`, `:eu_west_1a`, `:eu_west_1b`.
* `:disk` -- a hash of `device => volume-id`.  Awsborn uses the disks to tell if a server
  is running or not (see *Launching a cluster*).

Optional keys:

* `:ip` -- a domain name which translates to an elastic ip.  If the domain name does not
  contain a full stop (dot) and `domain` has been specified above, the domain is added.

Keys that override server type settings:

* `:instance_type`
* `:sudo_user`
* `:security_group`
* `:keys`
* `:bootstrap_script`

### Launching a cluster

The `launch` method on the cluster checks to see if each server is running by checking
if the server's disks are attached to an EC2 instance, i.e., the server is
defined by its content, not by its AMI or ip address.

Servers that not running are started by calling the `start` method on the server,
which does the following:

    def start (key_pair)
      launch_instance(key_pair)

      update_known_hosts
      install_ssh_keys(key_pair) if keys

      if elastic_ip
        associate_address
        update_known_hosts
      end

      bootstrap if bootstrap_script
      attach_volumes
    end

The `key_pair` is a temporary key pair that is used only for launching this cluster.
In case of a failed launch, the private key is available as `/tmp/temp_key_*`.

## A bootstrapping script

This is what we use with the AMI above:

    #!/bin/bash

    echo '------------------'
    echo 'Bootstrapping Chef'
    echo

    aptitude -y update
    aptitude -y install gcc g++ curl build-essential \
      libxml-ruby libxml2-dev \
      ruby irb ri rdoc ruby1.8-dev libzlib-ruby libyaml-ruby libreadline-ruby \
      libruby libruby-extras libopenssl-ruby \
      libdbm-ruby libdbi-ruby libdbd-sqlite3-ruby \
      sqlite3 libsqlite3-dev libsqlite3-ruby

    curl -L 'http://rubyforge.org/frs/download.php/69365/rubygems-1.3.6.tgz' | tar zxf -
    cd rubygems* && ruby setup.rb --no-ri --no-rdoc

    ln -sfv /usr/bin/gem1.8 /usr/bin/gem

    gem install chef ohai --no-ri --no-rdoc --source http://gems.opscode.com --source http://gems.rubyforge.org

    echo
    echo 'Bootstrapping Chef - done'
    echo '-------------------------'

## Running with Chef Solo

Awsborn integrates with [Chef Solo](http://github.com/opscode/chef).  An example from reality:

    Awsborn.access_key_id = 'AKIAJHL53MPX7LPCKIFQ'

    class LogServer < Awsborn::Server
      instance_type    :m1_small
      image_id         'ami-2fc2e95b', :sudo_user => 'ubuntu'
      security_group   'Basic web'
      keys             '../keys/*'
      bootstrap_script 'chef-bootstrap.sh'
      monitor          true

      cluster do
        domain 'releware.net'
        server :log_a, :zone => :eu_west_1a, :disk => {:sdf => "vol-a857b8c1"}, :ip => 'log-a'
        server :log_b, :zone => :eu_west_1b, :disk => {:sdf => "vol-aa57b8c3"}, :ip => 'log-b'
      end

      def chef_dna
        {
          :user => "lumberjack",
          :host => host_name,
          :users =>  [
            {
              :username => "lumberjack",
              :authorized_keys => key_data,
              :gid => 1001,
              :uid => 1001,
              :sudo => true,
            }
          ],
          :packages => %w[
            vim
            heirloom-mailx
          ],
          :gems => [
            "rake"
          ],
          :ebs_volumes => [
            {:device => "sdf", :path => "/apps"}
          ],
          :recipes => [
            "packages",
            "users",
            "sudo",
            "openssh",
            "ec2-ebs",
            "git",
            "gems",
          ]
        }
      end
    end

Just add a `Rakefile` in the same directory:

    require 'awsborn'
    include Awsborn::Chef::Rake
    require './servers'

You are now able to run `rake` to start all servers and run Chef on each of them.
See `rake -T` for more options.

## Bugs and surprising features

No bugs are known at this time.

### Untested features

* Launching without ssh keys.  (I suppose certain AMIs would support that.)

## To do / Could do

* Tests.
* Dynamic discovery of instance types and availability zones.
* Hack RightAws to verify certificates.
* Elastic Load Balancing.
* Launch servers in parallel.
* Make `image_id` a hash with different AMIs for different instance types.
* Make `image_id` overridable per server.


## Note on Patches/Pull Requests

* Fork the project.
* Make your feature addition or bug fix.
* Add tests for it. This is important so I don't break it in a
  future version unintentionally.
* At the moment, the gem does not have any tests.  I intend to fix that,
  and I won't accept patches without tests.
* Commit, do not mess with rakefile, version, or history.
  (if you want to have your own version, that is fine but bump version in a commit by itself I can ignore when I pull)
* Send me a pull request. Bonus points for topic branches.

## History

This gem is inspired by [Awsymandias](http://github.com/bguthrie/awsymandias)
which was sort of what I needed but was too complicated to fix, partly because
the documentation was out of date.  Big thanks for the inspiration and random
code snippets.

## Copyright

Copyright (c) 2010 ICE House & David Vrensk. See LICENSE for details.
